He spent whole days with her, whiling away the time at Go or at character-guessing games, and such were her wit and grace, so enthralling in quality her every gesture, that after those years of forbearance while her charm had offered nothing more, he could endure it no longer; and so despite his compunction it came to pass one morning, when there was nothing otherwise about their ways with each other to betray the change, that he rose early while she rose not at all. “What can be the matter?” her women asked each other anxiously. “She must not be feeling herself.” Before leaving he put a writing box beside her, inside her curtains. At last, when there was no one nearby, she lifted her head and found a knotted letter at her pillow. Opening it uncomprehendingly, she read, “Ah, what distances kept us so strangely apart, when night after night we two yet lay side by side in our overlapping clothes.” He seemed to have dashed it off with the greatest of ease. She had never suspected him of such intentions, and she could only wonder bitterly why in her innocence she had ever trusted anyone with such horrid ideas. Toward midday he returned. “You seem to be ill. What is wrong, then? Today will be no fun if we cannot play Go.” He peeped in: she was still lying with the bedclothes over her head. The gentlewomen drew back as he went to her. “Why will you not talk to me? You do not like me after all, do you. Your gentlewomen must be wondering about all this.” He pulled the covers off her and found her drenched in perspiration. Even the hair at her forehead was soaking wet. “Oh, dear, we cannot have this! What a fuss you are making!” She was still furious with him, though, despite his attempts to console her, and she refused him a single word in reply. “Very well, then,” he said reproachfully, “I will not come anymore. I feel quite unwanted.” He opened the writing box and peered inside, but there was nothing in it. What a little girl she still is! He contemplated her fondly. He spent the whole day trying to make her feel better, and her refusal to yield only made her more precious.
