They whiled away the hours, relieving their tedium by playing Go or word games like hentsugi, writing down radicals or parts of a Chinese character and trying to guess which one it was. Murasaki had a clever and engaging personality, and she would demonstrate endearing talents in even the most trivial of pastimes. For several years he had driven all thoughts of taking her as a wife out of his mind, dismissing her talents as nothing more than the accomplishments of a precocious child. Now he could no longer control his passion— though he did feel pangs of guilt, since he was painfully aware of how innocent she was. Her attendants assumed he would consummate their relationship at some point, but because he had always slept with her, there was simply no way for them to know when that moment would come. One morning Genji rose early, but Murasaki refused to get up. Her behavior worried her attendants. “What’s wrong?’ they whispered. “She seems unusually out of sorts today.” Right before Genji returned to his own quarters, he placed just inside her curtains a box filled with inkstones, brushes and paper, which she was to use for the customary morning-after letter. When there was no one else around, Murasaki finally lifted her head and found his betrothal note folded in a love knot at her pillow. Still in a daze, she opened the letter. How strange that we have stayed apart so long Though we slept together night after night With only the robes we wore between us The poem was written in a playful, spontaneous manner, as if he had allowed his emotions to carry him along. It had never crossed her mind that he might be the kind of man who harbored such thoughts about her, and she burned with shame when she recalled their sordid first night: How could I have been so naive? How could I have ever trusted a man with such base intentions? Genji returned to her quarters at midday, peeking in through her curtains. “Something seems to be bothering you ... are you not well? It would be quite tedious for me if we weren’t able to play Go today.” Murasaki was still lying facedown. She pulled the bedding up over her face so that she would not have to look at him. When her attendants withdrew, Genji went over to her. “Why are you acting so despondent? Are you displeased with me? I never imagined that you could be so cold. Your women must think this is all very queer.” He tugged her bedding away. She was bathed in perspiration, and tears had soaked the hair framing her forehead. “Now this won’t do at all!” Genji was put out. “Tears on the first day of your marriage? It’s ominous ... very inauspicious.” He tried all sorts of things to cheer her up, but she thought him utterly horrid and refused to speak. “All right, then, have it your way,” he told her spitefully. “I won’t come here any more if you insist on putting me to shame!” He opened the box with the writing implements and checked inside. There was no reply note. She’s still a child after all, he thought ruefully. He now felt sorry for her and decided to stay with her inside the curtains for the rest of the day. He passed the whole time trying to comfort her, but this proved difficult. Her refusal to warm up to him, however, merely made her look all the more precious to him.
